---
id: 5e94ee66-18fe-4316-84a5-4b30e998e3c6
blueprint: news
title: 'Tribute to ARRT Trustee John Archer'
categories:
  - news
accelerate_page_layout: default_layout
wpmdr_menu: '1'
tpg-post-view-count: '353'
featured_image_url: 'https://arrt.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2023/04/JA_obit.jpg'
slug: tribute-to-arrt-trustee-john-archer
hero_image: post/tribute-to-arrt-trustee-john-archer/ja_obit.jpg
---
<p>John Archer, who died in February, served as a Trustee of ARRT since it was formed eleven years ago. He fulfilled many roles in making the Trust into the force that it is today. As a very kind and thoughtful person, his contributions to the boardroom debate were always carefully considered and steadfastly delivered. His abundant common sense, energy and humour, along with his keen eye for detail meant he was a great Trustee and colleague.</p>
<p>Before joining the ARRT Board John spent an eventful career in the Royal Navy, and later worked for the NFU. He thrived on meeting and helping farmers develop their relationship with the streams and rivers near their farms. He masterminded the creation of a farmer group in order to initiate mutual help and support between neighbours. This earned him many friends in the community. His good nature and light touch defused many a difficult situation.</p>
<p>He also brought his diplomatic skills to bear on the water companies in West Sussex. He earned their respect with his good-natured insistence on them adopting responsibility for the environment and being seen as participants in a joint endeavour for better water quality in the rivers and rifes.</p>
<p>John will be greatly missed by all that knew him, and especially ARRT. Our thoughts are with John’s wife Kim, his family, and friends.</p>
<p>March 2023</p>
